The humble spreadsheet is the workhorse of the finance industry.

Every financial analyst has spent hours, preparing complex spreadsheets, only for an error to creep in here or there.

The spreadsheet is a gift and a curse. Its luscious visual appeal is beguiling, but keeping track of hundreds or thousands of cell formulae inevitably leads to headaches and errors.

Financial analysts are often far smarter than their spreadsheets allow. Investing a little time into more modern technology and ideas will reap immediate benefits to the average analyst.

This book will show you how to use a few lines of Javascript to automate your daily tasks.

##Javascript

Javascript is even more ubiquitous than Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) it is available on every desktop in the form of a web browser, into which we can load and process files and download the results.

VBA is the goto language for analysts, but even when it was fresh decades ago it was never considered a proper programming language.

Javascript, moreover, is the world's most commonly used language with a large number of libraries that make solving problems easy.

It is also the language with the most money behind it. Microsoft, Google, Apple and Mozilla all invest heavily in the language. All those corporations are taking part in an unprecedented race to have the fastest Javascript implementation, making the language one of the most efficient also.

## Functional

We will focus on a functional style of programming which is both succinct and declarative.

Functional code often requires an order of magnitude fewer lines of code than the imperative
alternative.

The reason is that imperative code comes from a lineage of telling the computer exactly what to do, step by step. This was a necessity when computers were slow.

Functional programming on the other hand is a little more mathematical. In fact, the basic building block of a functional language is the mathematical function, which simply maps inputs into outputs (similar to a spreadsheet formula).

Such succinct code which reduces boilerplate leaves code that describes and solves the problem at hand, this is often called declarative or intuitive code.

##The Way Forward

Each chapter will solve a common problem faced by financial analysts; introduce a functional programming concept; and discuss a line or two of code in detail.

For example, the first chapter discusses maps and shows how you can solve a common Extract Transform Load (ETL) problem, and discusses the magical line of code which will help reduce all the nasty daily spreadsheet copying and pasting.

The goal of the book is not just practical automation; it is also about writing elegant code which gets you thinking and edifies your daily tasks to boot.

As the old programming adage goes,

> Laziness is a virtue